build-lists: true
footer: IDM 231: Scripting for IDM I
slidenumbers: true
autoscale: true
theme: Plain Jane, 3

# IDM 231
## Scripting for<br>Interactive Digital Media I

---

# ECMAScript

- invented in 1995 by NetScape
- Microsoft develops JScript late 1996
- European Computer Manufacturers Association (ECMA)
- version 1 released 1997
- several versions since then

^ The ECMAScript specification details the standards that scripting languages like JavaScript should meet. A quick history lesson: (_click_) JavaScript was invented by NetScape in 1995 and released as part of the Netscape Navigator browser in 1996. In response, (_click_) Microsoft developed a similar language called JScript. Since there were differences between the two languages, Netscape gave JavaScript to the (_click_) European Computer Manufacturers Association (ECMA) to develop a standard. (_click_) Version 1 of the standard was released in 1997, and (_click_) several versions have been released since then.

---

## Versions & Releases

| Version | Release date |
| :-----: | :----------: |
| 1 | June 1997 |
| 2 | June 1998 |
| 3 | December 1999 |
| 4 | Abandoned |
| 5 | December 2009 |
| 5.1 | June 2011 |
| 2015 (ES6) | June 2015 |
| 2016 (ES7) | June 2016 |

^ When the sixth version of the ES specification was released, the committee in charge of the specification changed how it would release new versions going forward. Instead of having a set specification that they would release when all the features were completed, they moved to yearly releases of features that had been approved to that point. That’s why the ECMAScript versions starting with ES6 are named by year rather than by version number.

---

## Enhancements (ES6)

- promises
- syntax improvements
- block scope
- several built-in methods

^ Adds Promises, which is a simpler syntax for callback functions.

^ Adds several syntax improvements that make code easier to read and understand.

^ Adds block scope and easier ways to work with classes.

^ Adds several built-in methods for working with strings, numbers, objects, and arrays.

---

## Enhancements (ES7)

- syntax for computation with powers.
- array method

^ Adds a simpler syntax for computation with powers.

^ Adds an array method to check if an array includes a speci ed element

---

## Can We Use It?

- [ES6](http://kangax.github.io/compat-table/es6/)
- [ES7](http://kangax.github.io/compat-table/es2016plus/)

---

## New Features, Old Browsers

^ If you want to use some of the new features of ECMAScript but still support a wide range of browsers, you can use pollyfill files and transpilers. Polyfill files are JavaScript libraries that you include with your applications. Transpilers convert new JavaScript code to older versions of JavaScript code.

---

### Polyfills

- [ES6 Shim](https://cdnjs.com/libraries/es6-shim)

^ A polyfill file (also called a shim file) is a JavaScript library that implements features in browsers that don’t support them. The shim  les support features that are either additions to existing objects or new objects themselves. Some examples of these are the Promise object type, and new methods of the String, Number, Math, Array, and Object object types.

---

### Transiler

- [Babel](https://babeljs.io)

^ A transpiler is a program that takes code written in one language and converts it to another language. A transpiler lets you work with new ECMAScript features. Babel is a popular ES2015+ transpiler.

---

#### Transpiler Example

```javascript
{
  const one = 1;

  const myArray = [1, 2, 3];

  for (let myNumber of myArray) {
    console.log(myNumber);
  }

  const myFunction = myParameter => {
    console.log(`Hello ${myParameter} World`);
  }
}
```

---

## ES6 Enhancements

^ Let's look at a few enhancements available with ES6 that can simplify our code.

---

### `let` Keyword

^ Variables that are declared outside a function have _global scope_ so they are available to all functions. Conversely, variables that are declared inside a function have _local scope_ so they are only available within the function.

^ Prior to ES2015, those were the only types of scope that were available. But now, ES2015 provides a `let` keyword that lets you create _block scope_. This means that the variable is only available within the block of code in which it’s coded, like a while statement or a for loop.

---

#### `let` Example

```javascript
function varTest() {
  var x = 1;
  if (true) {
    var x = 2;  // same variable!
    console.log(x);  // 2
  }
  console.log(x);  // 2
}
```

---

#### `let` Example

```javascript
function letTest() {
  let x = 1;
  if (true) {
    let x = 2;  // different variable
    console.log(x);  // 2
  }
  console.log(x);  // 1
}
```

---

### `const` Keyword

^ Variables declared with the `var` or `let` keyword can have their values re-assigned. But with ES2015, you can use the `const` keyword to create a _constant_. When you declare a constant, you must also assign its value, and its value can’t ever be re-assigned.

---

#### `const` Example

```javascript
const taxrate = 0.78;

let tax = subtotal + taxrate;

taxrate = 0.75; // TypeError: Assignment to constant variable
```

---

### Arrow Functions

```javascript
(param1, param2) => { statements }
```

^ Arrow functions make it easier to pass a function definition as an argument to a function or method. They do that by removing a lot of the boilerplate code of a function definition.

---

#### Arrow Function Examples

```javascript
// Traditional ES5 function
var phraseSplitter = function phraseSplitter(phrase) {
	return phrase.split(' ');
}

// ES6
const phraseSplitter = phrase => phrase.split(' ');


let newPhrase = phraseSplitter('Hello World');
```

---

### Template Literals

```javascript
`string text ${expression} string text`
```

^ Template literals are string literals allowing embedded expressions. You can use multi-line strings and string interpolation features with them.

^ Template literals are enclosed by the back-tick character instead of double or single quotes. Template literals can contain placeholders. These are indicated by the dollar sign and curly braces (`${expression}`).

---

#### Multi-line Strings

```javascript
// Concatinated string
console.log('string text line 1\n' +
'string text line 2');

// Template Literal
console.log(`string text line 1
string text line 2`);
```

---

#### Expression Interpolation

```javascript
var a = 5;
var b = 10;
console.log('Fifteen is ' + (a + b) + ' and\nnot ' + (2 * a + b) + '.');
// "Fifteen is 15
// and not 20."
```

^ In order to embed expressions within normal strings, you would use the following syntax:

---

#### Expression Interpolation

```javascript
var a = 5;
var b = 10;
console.log(`Fifteen is ${a + b} and
not ${2 * a + b}.`);
// "Fifteen is 15 and
// not 20."
```

^ Now, with template literals, you are able to make use of the syntactic sugar making substitutions like this more readable:

---

#### Nesting Template

```javascript
const classes = `header ${ isLargeScreen() ? '' :
 `icon-${(item.isCollapsed ? 'expander' : 'collapser')}` }`;
```

^ It doesn't end there either. In certain times, nesting a template is the easiest and perhaps more readable way to have configurable strings. Within a backticked template it is simple to allow inner backticks simply by using them inside a placeholder `${ }` within the template. For instance, if condition a is true: then return this templated literal.

---

### Promises

^ ECMAScript 2015 introduces a new feature called Promises, which allows you to designate functions that should run in response to the eventual success or failure of asynchronous code.

---

#### Promise Example

```javascript
let myPromise = new Promise((resolve, reject) => {
	setTimeout(function() {
		resolve('Success!');
	}, 250);
});

myPromise.then((successMessage) => {
	console.log(`Yay! ${successMessage}`);
});
```

---

#### Promise Example

```javascript
let myPromise = new Promise((resolve, reject) => {
	// Create some dynamic elements and add them to the page.
	resolve();
});

myPromise.then(() => {
	// Add event listeners to all of the new elements.
});
```

---

## The Future

^ We're only scratching the surface here. There are dozens of additional updates and optimizations in ES6 and ES7. Once you have a strong foundation of JavaScript, it would be ideal to dive into these updates deeper and understand as much as possible about the cutting edge syntax.

---

## Let's Build Something